# Blog Post – Week 6

## Rescue policy from politics?

A common question posited by this week’s readings is whether open data is a method of rescuing policy from politics.  I think that’s a gross oversimplification, and I do not agree that it is the aim of open government data.  Unless used and analyzed in the right way, most data is meaningless.  And for most valuable uses of data, we require experts to sift through the information, build algorithms, and identify trends.  

Academics and scientists suggest smart policies all the time – just think of solutions to climate change.  Data, similarly, allows us to identify trends that can suggest ideal policy outcomes.  But it is the process of debating how society should allocate its resources and the vying for power among factions to exercise control over those resources that ultimately determine policy outcomes.  

I agree with the Center for Technology in Government that at times there is pent up demand for access to certain types of data – such as restaurant inspection data – that can prove useful to consumers.  At the same time, much of the details are hard to analyze to an untrained person.  If we can agree that restaurants are not all going to comply with 100 percent of regulations, what percent is appropriate?  What biases might consumers bring when attempting to analyze this data, and how accurate are their analyses?  These questions remind us that data is a tool but only when used in appropriate ways.  Data should inform policymakers in developing policy, but we cannot rely on the masses to accurately interpret data and make appropriate policy judgments.

## Open ≠ Innovation

Eugeny Morozov is right when he states that there are levels of “openness” and that some levels are not the aim of open government data.  I think the confusion stems from the difference between the terms open and innovation.  Open government data allows innovators to build tools that can allow consumers to better interact with their government and benefit from the wealth of data available.  But innovation is not the same as open government.  Innovation is about the product, whereas open is about the process.  And open government should similarly not be about APIs and other cool tools, but about ensuring that government information is accessible and useable, thus fostering not only innovation but also a greater knowledge about how government works.

## A Final Thought:  Is Open as Powerful as FOIA?

I was struck by Cordis and Warren’s findings about the benefits of FOIA to accountability in local government systems.  I wanted to consider whether the next study will find similar benefits from open government data, but I am not so sure.  Whereas FOIA provides incentives for those drafting policies and engaged in civic life and discourse to appropriately use their power and to represent the values of the electorate, open data does not have the same effect.  Open data speaks to what government collects, and that reflects more on us – the citizenry – than on government officials.  And so, given this logic, I wonder whether more and more data, and more and more open access to information has a potential to change us – whether by allowing us to reflect on our own behaviors or by incentivizing us to do our part to improve data outcomes.  The more granular the information, the more this incentive structure would hold, although admittedly such data about us has the potential to negatively impact our sense of personal privacy.
