This week’s reading material posed several interesting questions surrounding the efficiency and role of open government data policies. The role that open government data could and should play in governance was discussed in detail by Tom Lee in Open Data: Better Politics, Winning Politics…But Still Politics and Evgeny Morozov in Open and Closed.  

Prior to getting into what role open government data could play in governance it is critical to define open government data. As we have discussed throughout the semester-this is no easy task. In fact both Lee and Morozov suggest that the ambiguity of “openness” is detrimental to the movements success. Morozov seems to take a more radical approach in going as far as calling “openness” a dangerously vague term that can be used to make suspicious ideas acceptable. I am not sure I understand what he means by this. It seems that he is saying “open” is to information what “organic” is to food. Lee finds the terms ambiguity dangerous because it leads to unrealistic expectations that open data can never in and of itself accomplish. If the public does not have an understanding of what open government data truly entails we can never have an efficient conversation and or debate on the issue. 

 Lee further suggests the ambiguity of the term coupled with the zealousness of open data advocates may be further fueling unrealistic expectations. Lee explains that many of the advocates, like him, have a software engineering background, which “makes it all too easy to give in to the hopeful assumption that reality is a comprehensibly deterministic machine; that data are necessarily objective.” As a result open data advocates commonly promise that open government data will only enable the government to make better decisions. It is only natural for individuals to get excited about their own ideas and projects, but as any successful businessman will tell you it is crucial to stay objective and not fall in love with an idea. I am not saying that all open data advocates have lost their objectivity but I do believe if more outsiders gained an understanding of the open data movement there would be value added to the conversation. 
 
 So what is the proper expectation? Will open government data lead to better governance?  Both Lee and Morozov suggest open government data can help improve governance but not automatically. My issue with Lee’s conclusion on this matter is that he seems to believe the current expectation is that open government data will rescue policy from politics. Perhaps that is the expectation among the majority of open government data advocates but certainly not the American public. If most citizens are confused on what open data entails how can they possible begin to form such lofty expectations? Ultimately Lee concludes “We can smooth the flow of information through our institutions, but this alone will rarely be enough to redeem them, must less render them obsolete.”  I am unaware of anyone who is arguing that open government data will replace our democratic institutions obsolete...am I missing something? I agree with Morozov’s sentiments on this matter; “As an add-on to existing politics, this is wonderful. As a replacement for existing politics, though, this is terrifying.” In conclusion, I believe the proper expectation is that when done correctly open government data will improve governance but not drastically. 
