# Blog Post – Week 4

## A need to vet data users?

As the readings make abundantly clear, privacy is a major obstacle to the release of data and one that we still have not figured out.  We learn that methods of protecting sensitive data, whether restricting access to databases or using differential privacy methods have major flaws that impede research and are ripe for abuse.  As more and more information gets easier and easier to access, the pieces in the mosaic are far easier to put together than ever before.  

Last year, I worked on a journal note looking at the ways scammers can gain access to personal information from data brokers – entities that aggregate, collect, rent, and resell personal information – and use that information to commit fraud against vulnerable Americans such as the elderly.  As I dug deeper into the issue, I learned that personal data is readily available, that lists of names can be purchased for mere pennies per person, and that targeting vulnerable Americans is easy for a scammer looking to make a couple of bucks.  I also learned that data brokers are able to look the other way, and that they have very little incentive to vet purchasers of their data and their lists.  

In response to this problem, I suggested, among other things, that government develop greater incentives for data brokers to vet purchasers of their lists.  In New Hampshire, the case of [Remsburg](http://caselaw.findlaw.com/nh-supreme-court/1132429.html) brought this into focus, where a data broker sold sensitive personal information about a woman to her stalker and was later found vicariously liable when the stalker murdered the woman.

Data brokers are able to control who uses their lists.  For instance, under the [Federal Credit Reporting Act](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fair_Credit_Reporting_Act) (FCRA), credit reporting agencies that aggregate information about individuals for use in credit and employment decisions are prohibited from selling sensitive personal information for all but a handful of lawful uses.  Furthermore, consumers have legal rights when their information is used for impermissible purposes.

I discuss the data broker problem because I think there is a need to think about open government data in much the same way.  While governments are quick to release data, sometimes for financial benefit, other times for altruistic purposes, they may be releasing sensitive information that could harm citizens.  Based on the mosaic theory, it is possible for a stalker or law enforcement or some other unsavory character to invade a person’s privacy without their knowledge or consent.  But perhaps the answer is moving to a system where government places greater controls on data. For instance, users would be bound by contractual obligations or other legal obligations not to reveal sensitive information or to resell the information.  Ohm discusses the problem of querying databases and the potential to learn about individuals when doing so.  But on the other hand, if the user of the data is regulated and if the government had some obligation to vet the use, perhaps there might be less potential for harm.

Of course, the costs of vetting uses can be prohibitive and could be seen to limit access to information.  But at the end of the day, I am not convinced that just anyone should have access to all government data.  Aggregated data is useful to the public whereas data sets are perhaps only needed for the work of professionals such as economists, journalists, or academics.

## Aside: Riley Decision

I also wanted to weigh in on the Riley decision.  For the first time in a long time, the Court announced a decision that keeps with the tradition of the Fourth Amendment.  Without a warrant, officers should not have the unchecked ability to review a person’s personal data merely because that information is stored in a mobile computer such as a cell phone.  There is a great risk of a chilling effect on speech if users of cell phones cannot rely on legal process to keep their personal information personal.  It is fascinating to consider that the most progressive change to federal privacy law in the last few years came not from experts in Congress or regulators but from the conservative justices of the Supreme Court.
