This is the topic I have been waiting for.  For all of my interest and dedication to making government data open to the public, I think the other side of the coin is something that we have to seriously contend with.  While opening up government data is a desirable, doing so on a grand scale is bound to have consequences and those consequences almost certainly include breaches of privacy.  It does appear that advocates for open government data always acknowledge the potential for privacy problems.  However, in my opinion, none of them seem very concerned about it.  

Often, these open government data advocates appear to argue what boils down to the age-old adage that the antidote for unpalatable or undesirable speech is more speech; in other words, open up the data and all will be well because the more information that is out there, the better off we will be on the whole.  However, I am not sure this argument fits very well in the privacy context.  Even the Supreme Court, which has greatly expanded the First Amendment in the contemporary era, has carved out exceptions to the First Amendment when damage to reputation of private citizens is on the line.  If this all sounds skeptical, it is just because I am dedicated to making open government data a reality.  But I think that any effort to do so must guarantee privacy protections or the movement will delegitimize itself in an era where average citizens are beginning to value their privacy more than ever.   

What worries me most is that even conscious and serious efforts to insure privacy in this space have failed in the past.  As Paul Ohm illustrates, efforts at anonymization have been inadequate at best, largely because of redentification technology that can reassemble, and thus, reidentify, information.  Although Ohm seems to be optimistic about the prospect for true privacy protections through smarter regulation, and I am all for this approach, it seems to me that many of his recommendations will still fall victim to the same problems that the early efforts to anonymize did.  Namely, while technology is advancing to anonymize information and insure privacy protections, so too is the technology that can reidentify sensitive information.  His recommendations also seem to fall in line with the same lackadaisical tendencies of other open government advocates when he talks about the “costs and benefits of unfettered information flow.”

My skepticism is also buoyed by the Bambauer, Muralidhar, and Sarathy piece.  Even differential privacy, which is arguably one of the great advances in privacy protection, has proven to be ineffective, especially in the area of research.  The paper also raises the problem of defining privacy and highlights the fact that the differential privacy approach may focus too narrowly on what privacy means in the abstract.  These papers both raise the difficulties associated with coming to a compromise on open data and privacy and each of the conclusions in these papers give me cause to worry    

Given my dual to commitment to open government data and privacy, to be honest, the readings left me largely unsatisfied.  I am starting to wonder if the only answer is that these two concepts are mutually exclusive and if we are truly dedicated to open government data, we should realize that to make an omelet, we have to break some eggs.  I hope this is not the case, but I am starting to think that it is.  
