One of the many underlying topics throughout this semester is the effect of open data on an individual’s privacy.  Prior to starting this course I was not concerned about my privacy when thinking about the publication of government data. However, that quickly changed. In our first class, g Harlan Yu mentioned how easy it has been for individuals to “reidentify” data that was meant to be anonymous.  This phenomenon is the focus of Paul Ohm’s Broken Promises of Privacy: Responding to the Surprising Failure of Anonymization (“BPOP”)

Mr. Ohm explains that at the crux of data publication is the balance of individuals’ rights to privacy with the need for useful and complete data. He explains that the hypothetical best case scenario is when “analysts will still find the data useful, but unscrupulous marketers and malevolent identity thieves will find it impossible to identify the people tracked.” 

Unfortunately, Mr. Ohm contends that we are failing to adequately protect our privacy because we have placed too much faith in the computer science of anonymization.  The computer science of anonymization is  “a process by which information in a database is manipulated to make it difficult to identify data suspects.” I will not dispute the limits and failures associated with the anonymization of data. Rather, my focus is that with such limits in mind what is best means of achieving the aforementioned best-case scenario.  

First, regulators must make themselves aware of the problems that face the anonymization techniques currently in use. As Eric Mill mentioned in our second class, rarely does Congress consult with computer scientists when dealing with computer science issues.  So, this is yet another example of the government failing to adequately understand the technical issues involved in open government data. 

After the government better understands the issues facing data anonymization it would be wise for them to reconsider existing legislation dealing with data privacy. Mr. Ohm’s discussion of the HIPAA Privacy Rule is a good example. The fact that Congress enumerated 18 identifiers and assumed no other information contained in health records could be used to reidentify an individual’s identity seems ridiculous. Why would congress reduce the burden on hospitals to protect a patients’ identity? It seems to me it would be wise to maintain a “reasonable” standard, because then the protections could evolve with the times.  I also agree with Mr. Ohm’s call for stricter punishments for those who publish data that is later reidentified because it will deter entities from publishing data prematurely or irresponsibly. 

Ultimately, the best approach to limiting privacy concerns will be a mixture of market constraints, statutory obligations prior to the publication of data and legal recourse for privacy violations. 
