The mosaic theory of the Fourth Amendment raises a number of fascinating legal issues.  First, by aggregating conduct instead of looking at concrete steps, the mosaic theory is a very significant departure from current Fourth Amendment jurisprudence, the centerpiece of which is the so-called sequential approach.  The mosaic approach also raises questions such as what techniques can be considered tiles as part of the mosaic?  Should mosaic searches require a warrant?  And what about challenging mosaic searches – who and under what circumstances can do that? 

Putting things into perspective, the mosaic theory also represents a possible upgrade in providing a legal and sociopolitical response to technological developments.  The question arises – are there other possible legal reactions to the fact that our lives are changing rapidly due to technological developments?  And how do we balance the right to privacy with these developments?

The podcast provides an interesting example discussing the license plate readers used by police all over the country.  One striking piece of information is that in Maryland, for every million plates read, 47 were flagged for possibly being a stolen car.  Notwithstanding the privacy concerns, there is an underlying question that does not seem to get enough attention – does the mere fact that we are technologically capable of monitoring thousands of cars, pedestrians, situations, etc., mean that it is all needed?  Is it necessary based on the increase in the number of stolen cars?  Are only neighborhoods with higher criminal rates observed with street cameras?  Is it the best way to use taxpayers’ dollars?

A related thought comes from another podcast I have recently listened to.  The focus of this podcast was the presence of fear in today’s society.  The speakers presented a study that took place somewhere in a small town in rural America over a 30-year period.  The researchers first examined how children in the 1960s spent their free time – and, not surprisingly, they found that in this small town, most kids roamed around freely for several hours every day after school, playing freely, walking significant distances, and only going home late in the evening.  The researchers then examined the same small town 30 years later, in the late 1990s, and also looked at the same people who were children in the ‘60s – how they behave now as parents and how much freedom they give their kids.  Not surprisingly, what they found was that these parents (who played around freely in the ‘60s) now didn’t let their kids run around the streets after school, fearing that they could become victims of a crime, even though the very low crime rates in the town did not increase at all over the 30-year period!  The parents’ answer to the researchers’ observation was that “this is a modern world in which anything could happen today.”  Indeed, it could, but does it?  Is the preventive measure necessary?

The same way, this is a modern world in which technological developments enable us to do many things that would have been unimaginable a few decades ago.  Thousands of license plates can be read by cameras and other devices every day now.  Is it necessary?  Has it led to fewer car thefts?  

As we are discussing legal questions such as what techniques can be considered tiles as part of the mosaic theory of the Fourth Amendment, it would also be useful to step back and, looking at the bigger picture, analyze the rationale behind some of the techniques that have sparked these heated recent discussions about searches and the right to privacy.  