This week's readings demonstrated the insurmountable tension between open data and privacy concerns.  In their articles, Ohm and Barnbauer  provided critiques on the efficacy of anonymization and differential privacy as an effective remedy to ensure data privacy. The authors concluded that these techniques were both unworkable solutions. On one hand, anonymization relies on a false assumption that it is possible to evaluate the inherent riskiness of certain data categories; therefore, adversaries can easily de-anonymize information and disclose sensitive data.  On the other hand, differential privacy severely limits the presentation and formatting of data and also creates the risk of providing skewed, inaccurate results. Moreover, I believe that these two attempts to rectify privacy concerns deride the principals of open data. Timeliness, accessibility, transparency, and accuracy are just a few of the open government data principals described by Tauberer. I find that anonymization and differential privacy obstruct the achievement of these principals. For instance, removing all PII within a data set or formatting data into a database query is time-consuming and costly. The government would have a very difficult time in releasing current data if constrained by these privacy techniques.  In addition, when data is no longer raw and noise is added, differential privacy interferes with providing transparent, accurate data. The query format also prevents the user from carrying out his or her own analysis of the data, which is the basic premise of open government data. The Ohm and Barnbauer articles were very illustrative of the notion that perfect practices are simply not attainable in the field of open government data, and that adversaries will likely have a permanent upper hand.

In Riley v. California, the court recognized the unique privacy interests that are implemented in the search of digital information on a cell phone.  Ultimately, the court held that a warrant is generally required for searches of cell phone, but noted that technological progression  will likely affect privacy expectations. Technology is making it easier for the government and other entities to gather a multitude of sensitive information about citizens, but at the same time, citizens are voluntarily publicizing information about themselves on social media that was rarely disclosed a few decades ago. I believe this self-disclosure will necessarily result in a lower expectation of privacy in our electronic communications.

In the Washington Post article, the author addressed the controversy regarding the warrantless collection of cell site location information. While it is disconcerting that the government may subpoena a cellular service provider to provide information on the identity, activity, and location of any phone connected to a targeted cell tower, I believe it is permissible, since a citizen has no reasonable expectation of privacy in the data owned by their cellular service provider. Also I believe that prohibiting domestic cell-site monitoring while permitting extremely invasive warrantless investigations of non-citizens would send a confusing message regarding an individual's right to privacy -- namely, that it is a right exclusive to U.S. citizens. To contextualize, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act permits warrantless surveillance 'for national security purposes' of non-citizens reasonably believed to be located outside of the U.S. Probable cause and notice are not required, and in the majority of cases, the target has no idea that he or she is being investigated. Considering the U.S. government's disconcerting data mining practices on its own  citizens, I can only imagine the pervasiveness and intensity of  the government's data mining practices on individuals residing abroad who are not afforded the protections of the Fourth Amendment.

I'm aware that it is an unpopular opinion to condone the government's data mining practices, but if these practices are inevitable, I'd prefer for the U.S. to promote universal recognition of an individual's right to privacy, rather than imposing a rather arbitrary distinction based on citizenship. 
