"Open Government Data" has a bit of a semantics problem. Weinstein and Goldstein highlight the basic issue in their discussion of the differences between "open government" and "open data," the two core conceptual modes of open governement data. The first refers to politically sensitive information; the second refers, apparently, to the availability of raw "government" data in general. Behind those two domains lurks another possible reading of the term, "government data," which seems to refer to information that is owned, or at least possessed, by government. (Whether that information is "open" is a separate matter altogether.) Robinson et al. hint at this third mode in their discussion of how the Internet influenced promises of transparency in the 2012 presidential campaigns. Government, they say, should focus less on how data is presented to the public and more on building the infrastructure needed to get "government information" into the hands of the public. What they are saying is that there should be more emphasis on data and less emphasis on the government's stake in the data it holds. (In my view, this problem commonly arises when "government" is used as a possessive adjective. Sure, the government "owns" lots of data, but who owns the government?)

The semantics problem is driven by social change that is forcibly uniting interests from across the public domain. That social change is, in general, technology. In specific, it is data. Robinson argues that getting data out of the hands of government and into the hands of private third parties is the best way to respond to this social change, turning technology into civic engagement. My cynical side says this is wishful thinking. Sure, innovations like those Robinson points out (e.g., RSS feeds, wikis, crowdsourcing) are sure to follow as data is made increasingly available, but any increases in civic engagement brought on through these kinds of innovations is arguably shallow. Much ado has been made, for example, about President Obama's use of technology in the 2008 campaign and how it garnered the interest of so many young voters. (Ironic, perhaps, that Obama's infusion of technology and data into politics seems to have given a strong push to the open data movement.) But whether Obama's innovations in political tech will have any lasting effect on civic engagement is up for debate. The election stats from 2012 and 2014 suggest that we're back to business as usual. On the other hand, Robinson's government-as-data-publisher model seems about right. Even if the publication of vast amounts of "government" data has little effect on civic engagement, a policy favoring the availability of information, and making that the primary objective, is a good plan from which to deviate when matters like government secrecy, privacy, and proprietary interests come into play (as they surely will). 

The question I'm left with, espeically after reading Coding for Lawyers, is what practical effect "open government data" will have on lay attorneys. So far, I get the sense that the open data domain is a place for technologists. It intersects with the law only in that it intersects with government and governance. I may find that interesting for my own personal reasons, but otherwise there is a feeling of inside baseball that makes me wonder how much traction open data will get among lawyers. 
