The first class discussion provided a lot of insight for me. Over the last few years, I have worked in the field of government procurement data—analyzing historic contracts information to find meaningful trends that companies and the government can use to make decisions. In the class discussion, I found Harlan Yu's experience working at the Department of Labor on a federal grants related data initiative to be very interesting. Harlan described how an agency employee discouraged him from pursuing the publication of successful grant applications. This reminded me of a recent Government Accountability Office (GAO) report published in August 2014, which details how over $619 billion in Federal Assistance spending is either misreported or underreported to USASpending.gov. As I re-read the GAO report, I recognized that the a critical issue with agencies failing to report federal grants data was their inability to distinguish the “technological” and “political” aspects of federal grants data. Agencies consistently reported 4 of the 21 data elements, despite numerous memos from OMB instructing agencies to submit reports with the status of their federal grants reporting to USASpending.gov. 

From my experience working at USASpending.gov, it is not a very technologically difficult task to ensure that grants reporting is conducted on a platform similar to the Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS-NG) where data entry is validated. However, I believe that agencies consistently misreport this data, largely due to the risk of exposing anomalies and practices in the awarding of grants. While millions of grant awards (records) are present on USASpending.gov, the value of this data decreases exponentially due to the misreporting epidemic. Broader discussions related to the release of individual data sets need to occur, where stakeholders can debate the implications of releasing data, similar to our discussion in class. 

As Joshua Tauberer describes in his book chapter “Applications for Open Government,” depending on its nature/type, data can be equated to “sunlight,” playing the role of a “disinfectant.” Based on our class discussions, I am of the view that despite its limitations, possibility of being manipulated, and privacy risks, government spending data can play a substantial role as a mechanism to increase efficiency in the various procurement processes of the federal government, similar to fashion in which contracts data provides oversight. Specifically, it is a known fact that Federal Financial Assistance constitutes a much greater segment of government “spending” then contracts. However, unlike a contract, it is nearly impossible to track down grant recipients with accuracy. Since the concept of grant spending differs from a contract obligation, where one requires performance of the contract to full capacity in return for payment by the government, federal grants are given for the benefit of citizens through the federal government’s spending power. 

With the recent passage of the Digital Accountability and Transparency Act (DATA Act) and the publication of the “Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards,”  the federal government has outlined steps to improve “performance and outcomes while ensuring the financial integrity of taxpayer dollars in partnership with non-Federal stakeholders” who are involved in the full-cycle management of federal grants. The federal grants data is a prime example of a data set where the government, through standardization in the reporting practices, can help in the creation of a valuable “open data set” that can have practical benefits as an “auditing” instrument where interested stakeholders provide oversight. 
