One topic that was addressed in class last week involved the issue of whether open government data is a benefit to the government or to the people.  Although there was healthy dialogue on this topic, I feel that the issue wasn’t fully fleshed out.  This post attempts to address my perceived lack of resolution on this topic.

As illustrated by Tauberer in Open Government Data: The Book, it does appear to be the case that many of the original uses for open government data stemmed from the government’s interest in maintaining the status quo, as opposed to a benevolent attempt to democratize or equalize society.  Taking the Athenian example under consideration, it seems pretty clear that any access to government information that existed at the time was intended almost entirely for the purpose of keeping wealth and power in the hands of a few.  Additionally, early attempts at codification in Colonial America also appear to have stemmed largely from the self-serving interests of political elites, as opposed to being intended as a boon for the common person.

Though the concept of open government data may have risen from rather undemocratic origins, and, as illustrated by Yu and Robinson, may continue to serve authoritarian purposes if the ambiguity surrounding open government data is left unchecked, it strikes me as misguided to frame the debate in such a binary, mutually exclusive fashion.  Take the analogous example of the U.S. Constitution, which is, according to scholars such as Robert Dahl, one of the least democratic founding documents in existence.  As illustrated by Dahl and others, the U.S. Constitution was nothing more than a thinly veiled but effective attempt to protect the interests of wealthy property owners—which was, conveniently, written by those same wealthy property owners.  Even today, the document, by design, has the effect of maintaining the stability of the status quo at the cost of stifling democratic rumblings.  In an ironic turn of events, the written product of the American Revolution became an instrument to prevent democratic revolt. 

That said, the U.S. Constitution, largely through interpretation by modern courts, has evolved in ways that more clearly reflect democratic values.  Examples of this process include the expansion of substantive Due Process rights under the 14th Amendment.  In a similar way, open government data’s tainted origins have become less relevant in an environment where open access to information can be one of the greatest democratizing forces in existence.  Of course, that’s not to say that open government data is impossible of being used for the self-serving purposes of state at the expense of the people, but this possibility is mitigated when a few considerations are taken into account.  

Although Yu and Robinson’s fear that the ambiguity of “open government data” may be used by states to mask the failures of democratic governance is not unfounded, open government data can effectively and simultaneously serve the purposes of the government and the people.  When governments commit to the opening of government data, as understood as being for the purposes of accountability, innovation, participatory policy-making, access to the law and so on, see Tauberer, Ch. 5, they strengthen their own legitimacy.  When people perceive their governments as legitimate, not only are they more willing to engage in the democratic process and become more fulfilled and productive people, they are also more willing and more likely to support their governments.   Governments themselves benefit from this legitimacy because they can effectively and efficiently perform the job of governing without worrying about uprisings and revolts at every turn.  In specific contexts, such as procurement and government contracts, governments may also be able to enjoy other self-serving interests such as the avoidance of costly litigation if they are willing to allow access to government information.  When framed in this manner, the people, as well as the people in power, can reap the benefits of open government data.
