Prior to week one’s first meeting, I had had very little exposure to the notion of open data as it relates to, intertwines with, and is distinguishable from that of open government in today’s era of technology. I found the introductory readings informative and useful towards the building of a basic, historical and conceptual understanding of open government data; namely, Yu and Robinson’s piece clearly outlined the ways in which open government data has evolved and broadened (and continues to do so). The pivotal issue looming over the concept of open data, as addressed in the article, is that of ambiguity: in the realm of open government data, where does technology meet politics? Similarly, does the terminology “open” in and of itself embody a technological meaning, a philosophical meaning, or both? Finally, is the expansion of open data really facilitating the underlying goal of civic accountability?

The Harlan and Robinson piece conducts what is described as an “assessment of the merger” and evaluates the various global initiatives towards more open government. The authors argue that open government’s ability to actually to function as intended, as a tool of transparency that fosters accountability and engagement, is stifled, dependent on context. For example, in regimes where open data is encouraged, there is traceable benefit. However, in contrast, in regimes in which open government is required, results have been less promising. Essentially, the ambiguity of “open”ness lends itself to governments fulfilling their responsibility to abide by policy and be more “open” in less traditional ways. Rather, open government may simply be a strategic means for those in power to limit distribution to solely the “sensitive” or imperative information they deem appropriate. The phrasing utilized by the authors particularly resonated with me: government officials may satisfy public outcry for increased disclosure “by providing less nourishing, politically low-impact substitutes.” This topic seemed to largely shape our in-class discussion.

We collaboratively evaluated whether open government is actually bearing benefit, both domestically and on the international scale. As a class, we theorized that beyond political sphere, the ability of open data to be an effective tool versus a manipulative one is also contingent upon the degree of technological savvy of the constituents of any given government. Specifically, the example of Kenya stands out. The Kenya Open Data Initiative is arguably a futile effort, as such a limited percentage of the population is actually able to use the Internet compared to those of more highly developed nations. Thus, open data is essentially only accessible, at best, to the privileged that have computer and Internet access. This prompts the inquiry: at what point does open data translate into nothing more than a government spoon-feeding, so to speak, selective information to an elite audience? This strikes me as a far cry from the initial ideals of open government and a digression from the intended standard of ethics. The tools of the democratic have potentially become the swords of the totalitarian.

Beyond the foundational discussion, I very much enjoyed Harlan’s discussion of his own work. Much of the subject matter was new to me (screenscraping, xml, ocr technology, etc.). In regards to RECAP, I greatly commend his commitment towards empowering the cost efficiency of open government and accessibility of information. Further, I specifically took interest in what I read to be Harlan’s personal desire to strike an ethos/pathos/logos balance in his pursuit of the war on closed government. For example, he made mention of the real harms of taking court docs that may contain compromising information (potentially skeletons in one’s closet) and making these docs only a mouse click away. His remarks reminded me of the large-scale issue of “the right to be forgotten” and the effect technological advances have had on such right in this day and age. This is a topic I hope to further explore in Reading Group this semester, as I imagine many of my peers will have greatly varying viewpoints.
