For the sake of full disclosure I wanted to start by saying that I was not sure what topic we would be covering in this course when I registered for it last fall. After learning that this course covers open government data I became a bit nervous, because I was unsure what such a topic would entail.  However, the first week’s material and class discussion was an excellent primer on the topic and raised many fascinating issues. 

We talked at length about who benefits from open government data and I believe that when done properly both citizens and government interests are advanced. The question that interests me is how/when is open government data done properly. The answer is not simple, but I think the first step is choosing the appropriate information to publish. 

Harlan Yu spent considerable time discussing the issues the government faces when publishing data to the pubic. One such constraint is the need to review information prior to publishing it to ensure confidential information is not disclosed.. The example he discussed involved judicial opinions and court records which contain may contain sensitive information such as social security numbers and criminal records. Mr. Yu discussed how it is the responsibility of attorney’s to ensure confidential information is properly redacted, but an individual’s criminal record is not so simple. Often such information is not by law confidential but nonetheless its publication has an effect worth the government considering-an individuals ability to seek employment. It seemed that Mr. Yu believed in this instance that the publication of judicial opinions an court records was appropriate because it was for the greater good. 

However, it is not always so simple to measure when the publication of information serves the greater good. What should the Government do when it is not so black and white? For example, we discussed the release of health inspection records and how such records could benefit the public but at whose expense? Despite not containing an individual’s criminal record or personal information health inspection records may be sensitive information because of their potential affect on local businesses. At what point does the government release too much information? Some people argue that there is no such thing as too much information but I do not agree. I believe the government has a duty to conduct a cost-benefit analysis on almost every category of information they consider reporting in order to make sure it benefits the community more than it damages it. 

There is always two sides to the coin. Publishing health inspection records may benefit the public by informing them on the level of sanitation at local restaurants but may also damage small business owners by subjecting them to a heightened level of restaurant scrutiny. I am not an expert on the restaurant market but to me the potential detrimental effect on local restaurants outweighs the public’s interest in the information. My perception is that the public’s main interest is not to dine at unsanitary restaurants, which seems satisfied by the mere existence of health inspections. Thus, the publishing of health inspection records may not further benefit society but rather damage local business. If that were the case, the benefit would not outweigh the cost and such information would be inappropriate for the government to publish.  Clearly I have oversimplified the cost-benefit analysis but the point is that every time information is published there is a potential adverse effect on some part of the community worth considering. 
