
The rise of the availability of government information has sparked a broad debate among society about the potential for societal advancement. The discussion of the availability of government information ranges from the benefits for society and civic participation, to the change in the role of government contractors, to the international impact and consequences of increased transparency of the government. An aspect of government data I find especially interesting is the ability of this data to inform policy decisions. While the concept of increased visibility of government decision-making seems to implicitly include a change in the way policy decisions are made, I am interested in seeing how society will utilize access to government information to impact policy decisions. In the reading Government Data, we saw how creativity and innovative thinking can be used alongside government data to spark discussion and encourage the advancement of society.  
In Joshua Tauberer’s Government Data: The Book, he discusses how government information has been used in relation to public education and neighborhoods. An example he offers is how the National Neighborhood Indicators Partnership (NNIP) encouraged an exchange of data on information on neighborhoods. As a result, an NNIP partner used data to show problems with elementary school reading proficiency in Chattanooga, Tennessee. The community responded to this shortcoming, which was made available by data sharing, by creating a position to oversee elementary school reading proficiency within Chattanooga. This example highlights the use of data gathering and compiling to put the spotlight on problems within communities, and allow societies to reallocate resources to address what appear to be their biggest issues. The creativity factor comes into play by allowing citizens to participate in how the data is shared, and therefore use the data to highlight issues that are important to them. 
I thought Tauberer’s use of multiple examples of how government data can be used was a good illustration of the potential open government data has on impacting society, and also highlighted the potential role for civilians to play in using the data to impact society. While Tauberer highlighted the positive impact of open government data on society, and showed citizen participation in a productive light, I am concerned about the manipulation of data and use for negative purposes. A question that comes to mind is how criminals could possibly use government data to enhance their illegal operations; while I am sure governments will not be sharing sensitive information, there is still the possibility that access to more information will allow criminals increased transparency of governmental operations. While I am unable to think of any specific concerns at the moment, an example could be drug traffickers, gang members, and even enemy countries that want insight into what our country is doing. Our discussion in class was focused on what the role government data will play in terms of negative and positive effects, where as Tauberer was able to highlight that open data will be a tool with ample potential for academics, scholars, lobbyists, etc. to manipulate data to encourage social change and put a spotlight on issues. 
I am very interested in seeing how the future unfolds and how different groups of people with different interests will utilize open data in different ways. I think that there is a large potential for creativity in the way data is manipulated and presented, and I think there will be many unexpected consequences and ramifications due to the nature of government data and the anecdotes we have read about. I look forward to seeing how open data will be used to influence populations and incur support or opposition towards certain movements. 
