Open Government Data – class 1

We addressed a number of interesting issues during the first class, among which I wanted to follow up on the question whether different national models of open data and open government can, and actually should, be harmonized globally.

Open data and open government principles can play extremely different roles based on the stage of development of a nation and society.  The Weinstein & Goldstein article highlights the importance of the Kenyan Open Data Initiative in increasing the quality of public services and the transparency of government in Kenya.  In emerging and developing countries, the benefits of open data and open government can be exponentially higher than in more established countries in which some of these principles have been part of the air the society breathes for some time.  For example, following the ongoing discussions about the European Union (EU) Data Protection Directive, one could argue that in the EU open government is a principle that is more present in people’s mind than open data (also referring to recent developments with respect to the right to be forgotten).  On the other end of the spectrum, with the adoption of FOIA in 1966, the United States created a framework that would likely be unimaginable for a large number of countries – it reflects that in a developed society like the U.S., the nation feels that the benefits from a framework established by FOIA outweigh the costs of implementing such a program.  Or do they?  As Tauberer notes, in FY 2008 the USG spent $338 million on FOIA-related activities, mostly covering the expenses of the 3,691 FTEs dealing with FOIA matters.  The question arises – do the benefits of these activities outweigh the costs for the society?  Does a regular assessment to this effect take place in the USG?  And if other countries do not create a FOIA-like system, do their citizens see fewer benefits of open government and open data? 

Although there may be different national responses to the question what framework works best for individual countries, we can see the globalization of a big tent view including some core principles about open government and open data many countries can agree with.  In a short period of time, the Open Government Declaration has shown how soft law tools can play a crucial role in harmonizing substantive rules among nations with very different legal, sociopolitical, and economic frameworks.  As seen in other multilateral fora, such as the World Trade Organization (WTO), the International Consumer Protection Network (ICPEN), and the International Competition Network (ICN), countries can often find a common ground with respect to non-binding high-level (or simply aspirational) principles that generally apply to a large number of them.  Once agreeing on principles as international best practice, the next step, however, is how countries can implement these practices – when national substantive and procedural rules converge among a large number of countries (such as in the case of antitrust and competition law and policy), finding global consensus on key issues and putting them to practice may be easier than in areas that reflect a much wider range of national rules and specialties (such as trade).  If that happens, harmonization will likely yield the best results for countries that were on the lower end of the development scale. 

Since this arena includes so many national responses to open data and open government that evolve constantly at an extremely rapid pace, it may take quite some time until national frameworks will be aligned enough to be able to serve as a platform for further harmonization in this area.
