Tauberer made the positive outcomes of the boom in open government data abundantly clear as he discussed the value of FOIA requests, and the improvements government data offers. However, the cost/benefit analysis seemed, to me, to be differ between data that provides transparency and data that offers service delivery.

Elected officials may be best left to make decisions they've been charged with as elected officials in a democratic republic; transparency data can therefore reach a point of diminishing returns as scrutiny and its resulting criticism become goals in their own rights, and just fuel partisan fires. Information that identifies real corruption, and which enables citizens to see where waste and fraud are occurring, offer real benefits the more they provide. On the other hand, much of transparency data is released en masse, and as such is largely inscrutable to the average citizen. This opens the door for the misuse of the data by interested parties; this is part of why we have the comical experience today of people on different sides of political debates citing detailed and complex analyses of data to support opposite viewpoints, even where both sides bring data that seem to be mutually exclusive, and from seemingly credible sources. Look also to the legal jurisprudence surrounding executive privilege, and the chilling effect transparency can have on effective policymaking. Furthermore, the Kenya example illustrates that government transparency data is only as useful as its citizens can make it. Government transparency data undoubtedly improves the quality of government, but it is not necessarily always better to have more of it.

In the context of service delivery data, the proposition is different. The electorate has charged its officials with making the hard choices to provide certain services, and so has a strong interest in the best, clearest, and most equitable delivery of those services. Moreover, the government is often the broadest and least-biased collector of data on many aspects of the nation’s economy and activity, from housing starts to employment to child care. 

I had some specific reactions to the roles of individuals and entities mentioned. It was great to see Rep Pelosi involved in the Sunlight Foundation early on, but what has her continued involvement been? Elected officials are often excited to embark on projects that really improve governance, but quickly slam into the wall of conflicting constituent and governing realities. On the note of partisan support, I would love to see a site like “Dirty Energy Money” for paid influence on behalf of renewable and clean energy interests; we now see both fossil fuels and green sources heavily subsidized by complicated conduits, and it would be worth seeing how that side interacts with politicians.

POPVOX seems to be finding success because it addresses a governance problem by being a consumer product. POPVOX presents open government data on bills before Congress in a way just refined enough for citizens to understand, but without making a point that obscures the real meaning in a partisan way. 

Interesting how legal production reqs cause such problems in open government data production; are there private sector, perhaps e-discovery, solutions that the government could effectively adopt?



