This week’s reading provided a fantastic overview of the first four weeks of this course, especially the Executive Office of the President’s; Big Data: Seizing Opportunities, Preserving Values. The focus of this publication was to “identify how the public and private sector can maximize the benefits of big data while minimizing risks.” The review is a fantastic primer for the material we have discussed throughout this semester and I recommend that it be assigned earlier on in the course moving forward.  I will be focusing my attention on the following components of the report: (i) the impact of Executive Order 13642; (ii) the establishment of data.gov; and (iii) The Obama Administration’s “My Data Initiatives”. 

I approached the “Open Data in the Obama Administration” section of the report with a bit of skepticism, since the Executive Office of the President Obama wrote it. The report purports that Executive Order 13642 “established an important new principle in federal stewardship of data: going forward, agencies must consider openness and machine-readability as the new defaults for government information, while appropriately safeguarding privacy, confidentially, and security.” The statement is well crafted and touches upon much of our discussions, but is there any teeth to Executive Order 13642? We have discussed in detail the issues with accomplishing the objectives of the order. Where in the report is the President’s consideration of issues such as the limits to data anonymization? 

The report goes on to describe the goal and progress of Data.gov, which again lacks any issue spotters or criticisms. For example the report mentions that each agency is required to solicit input through digital feedback mechanisms, like an email address or an online platform but fails to mention to what extent the agency must review them-an issue that Eric Mill mentioned during his presentation. 

The report continues its discussion of “Open Data in the Obama Administration” by introducing a series of “My Data Initiaves”. The Obama administration introduced these initiatives to “empower Americans with secure access to their personal data and increase citizens’ access to private-sector applications and services that can be used to analyze it.” The first initiative discussed is titled “Blue Button”, which “allows consumers to securely access their health information so they can better manage their health care and finances and share their information with providers.” I am curious whether or not providers are actually working with the government in order to accomplish this initiative.  I know from personal experience that it is often a struggle to have DC providers send critical medical information (i.e. x-rays) to providers in other areas. Blue Button would solve this issue by allowing patients to send such information to other providers themselves. So, why do only 150 million Americans have the promise of being able to access their digital health information from health care providers? 

The second initiative is titled “Get Transcript”, which makes it possible for taxpayers to digitally access their last three years of tax information.  The privacy concerns like almost any other big data initiative are endless. The potential benefit of such an application are tremendous, but is it necessary for the government to create such initiative and risk individuals’ privacy? It seems like the collection of tax information is something an individual can accomplish simply by making a copy of their tax returns etc. What value is Get Transcript adding to information that taxpayers already can access through self-action? 

The third and final initiative I will consider is titled “Green Button”, which “provides families and businesses with easy access to their energy usage information in a consumer-friendly and computer-friendly format.” However, Green Button fails to provide “easy access”, rather you must visit the site and then send an e-mail to an administrator. I have completed my request and look forward to hearing back from the folks at Green Button.  The advantage of receiving information regarding energy usage is clear, but whether or not it’s the role of government to provide such information is not. I am confused as to why the government needs to serve as a middleman. Mandating or incentivizing energy providers to issue these reports to their customers could accomplish the same initiative. Is this really government data? 

Again, this report was an excellent primer to the various subjects we have discussed this semester. After reading the prior assigned materials it is clear that this report fails to consider or discuss how the government will approach big data in practice. Even, the “Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights” section fails to mention how any of these rights will be enforced or implemented in practice. 
