The topic of data integrity and preservation, even if a little dry at first blush, strikes me as one of the more important topics that we have covered so far.  Even in the most ideal of outcomes for the open government data movement, wherein data is truly open and universally accessible, none of those accomplishments would be worth anything if the quality of the data is not up to par and the actual existence of the data is in question.  Given the importance of these to issues to the realization of open government data goals, it seems imperative that integrity and preservation are guaranteed in any open government data regime.

That said, it appears to be easier said than done, given the fact that government data, as illustrated by Michael Froomkin, is subject to numerous potential breaches and it is the governments themselves who define the scope of liability for breaches.  This scenario creates a situation in which there is massive potential for data breaches and less than ideal legal mechanisms for holding governments liable and accountable for such breaches, due to the effective absence of incentives for governments to behave wisely in their stewardship of data.  While bad publicity can be a method of incentivizing government agencies to be faithful stewards of data, it leaves much to be desired, as Froomkin points out.  

Given the existing situation in regard to potential breaches of government data, and the absence of existing methods for combating the problem, Froomkin’s constitutional argument strikes me as incredibly compelling.  Because the idea of open government data is a relatively new and emerging concept, with numerous bugs to work out, tying the legal obligation to protect data and the compensation for data breaches to the Due Process Clause enables governments and citizens to place government data within what should be a familiar legal paradigm for interested persons.  The notion that “[a] person or firm whose data has been exposed by the government has suffered a compensable deprivation of life, liberty, or property with the Due Process of law” is incredibly logical and conceptually elegant.  Although the situations to which substantive due process would apply in the open government data realm are quite complex, the Whalen and DeShaney standards as applied to data breaches strike me as no more complicated than any other constitutional law analysis.  Moreover, these standards, combined with Section 1983 actions, create a meaningful and practical legal mechanism for seeking justice when data is breached despite a government obligation to protect that data. 

Of course nothing about Froomkin’s constitutional framework for recovering when the government allows a breach of data does anything to address another potential problem for data integrity: the accuracy and credibility of existing data.  As the Nithya Raman article makes clear, this problem is persistent, even where government data is existent and said to be widely accessible.  Moreover, this problem may be particularly prevalent among developing nations and marginalized communities who lack the political power to shed light on such problems and who may need access to such data the most.  While the Raman article does little in the way of proposing solutions to this problem, simply highlighting it goes a long way in illustrating the importance of the accuracy and credibility of information for the burgeoning open data movement.  By treating these concepts as separate and distinct from existence and accessibility, Raman sheds light on the need for special attention to be paid to the accuracy, integrity, and preservation components of open government data.  Without equal emphasis on all of these potential problems, open government data will likely become a meaningless concept.  
