Over the past few weeks, I have been utterly and completely addicted to the Serial podcast. I could only imagine that at least a few of my peers in this course have been as well (and to anyone who is reading this and has not listened yet, I highly recommend doing so). This week’s discussion material quite conveniently ties into the many evidentiary issues and looming questions that reoccur throughout the podcast. In summary, during the homicide trial against Adnan Syed, the prosecution leaned heavily on call logs and cell phone tracking technology to corroborate their key witness’ story. The use of cell phone tracking was the backbone to this case and quintessentially demonstrates the game changing affect such technology has had on the world of criminal procedure. Further, as the murder in question took place in 1998, the podcast host herself frequently poses “what if” style narration; what if this same series of events took place either pre-cell phone era, or today, nearly 17 years later? As these ideas have been swirling around in my head since I dove into the addictive world that is Serial, I found the Riley reading quite interesting.
 
The Riley case held that police generally may not, without a warrant, search digital information on a cell phone seized from an individual who has been arrested. The court then goes through a rather comprehensive discussion of precedent. The touchstone to the Fourth Amendment, they explain, is reasonableness. As originally written, the Fourth Amendment’s protection from search of oneself and one’s personal effects, and subsequently the federal rules of evidence, did not foresee the monumental changes that have been made to the landscape of personal communication and technology. Reasonableness in and of itself seems to interpretable very differently than it was ten, even five years ago. Case in point: “the cloud.” Particularly in the world of Apple products, everything syncs up (far beyond the comprehension of the average consumer. Seriously, I, an about typical, not quite tech savvy, middle class American consumer often feel that my devices almost eerily and magically sync and function in unison in a way that I do not understand but do not question). It feels as though some days when one gets a text, the room nearly shakes from the simultaneous notification on a Macbook, iPhone, and iPad. Calendar, messages, emails, reminders, everything syncs up in real time. With the latest Apple update, the iPhone can even sync and open up to the exact internet page one was looking at on his or her computer. As the court so brazenly phrases it, cell phones are “now such a pervasive and insistent part of daily life that the proverbial visitor from Mars might conclude they were an important feature of human anatomy.” While I am currently harping on 1. technology far beyond my comprehension and 2. things we all already know, this exact phenomenon is what is so troubling to courts. Searching one’s phone is no longer equivalent to searching one’s basic effects as it once had been (“They could just as easily be called cameras, video players, rolodexes, calendars, tape recorders, librar- ies, diaries, albums, televisions, maps, or newspapers.”)  Nor does searching one’s phone serve the Chimel goals of officer safety or securing of evidence from destruction. The reach of a search of a cell phone is enormous, in that it grants access to essentially ones entire digitalized world, i.e. police can know exactly what you (or anyone, anywhere who, to your knowledge or not, is using your computer) were last looking at, who you were texting, emailing, photographing, and anything and everything in between. Moreover, the Riley court touches upon the issue of storage capacity issue. Even ten years ago, with a new phone, one would turn over a new leaf, so to speak. At best, you would carry over your contacts. Now, with storage capacity on smart phones increasing, it is typical to carry over everything; pictures that were originally taken 5 years ago now roll over to new devices, articles read 2 years ago may still show up in browser history, etc. I believe the court analogizes it to someone having a trunk with every book or article they have ever read, on hand during an arrest. In sum, searching a cell phone opens floodgates, giving enforcement access into nearly every part of one’s life, past and present.. While the current rule calls for warrants prior to searches, there may always be  “the continued availability of exigent circumstances.” Courts have encountered immense difficulty in deciphering case law and imposing holdings that strike the happy medium between drafting a rule that narrows searches, but in execution still imposes meaningful constraints

Relating back to Serial, I do see the other end of the spectrum and how cell phone technology can be immensely beneficial to criminal procedure. For example, in that podcast, the accused was asked nearly 6 weeks later what he was doing on a particular day, during a particular time (specifically, 21 minutes). Most of us now have an hour-by-hour account of nearly every day of our lives, as evidenced by our texts, calls, Gchats, Instagram posts, what have you. The existence of such data alleviates the difficulties of backtracking that once plagued other generations. This technology quite epitomizes the “blessing and a curse” concept. 

All things considered, this topic of discussion seems to form a circular theme for the course: the very public stage of digital data that yields so many benefits for society can also be a grave detriment to us; it has become difficult to point fingers and ask for accountability and disclosure on the end of the government but to then recoil and ask for constitutional protections when we ourselves want our “data” to be private.  
