 In 1968, Garrett Hardin published what would become an incredibly influential article called “The Tragedy of the Commons,” in which Hardin argued that individuals acting independently and rationally according to self-interest behave contrary to the best interests of the whole group by depleting some common resource.  Since then, authors from Naomi Klein to Peter Barnes have discussed the concept of “reclaiming the commons.” These authors argue that it is necessary to establish an absolute space in which private ownership of property is deemphasized and common ownership of “the commons” is emphasized in order to ensure a mutually beneficial stewardship of the commons for the whole of society.  In other words, there should be spaces where society prevents the privatization of common resources because all of us, as a collective entity, are entitled to equal ownership and access to those resources.  Although the line for which resources should fall under the umbrella of “the commons” has been debated, most of the people forwarding this idea agree that, at a minimum, air, water, and other natural resources unquestionably and categorically constitute “the commons.”  Others, such as Lawrence Lessig and Richard Stallman, would extend “the commons” to include scientific discovery, cultural and artistic developments, and most importantly for the purposes of this post, public information.
	Considering the notion of “the commons” in its broadest sense, that is, a commons that extends to all public information, it becomes apparent that the very concept of copyright may be in tension, if not direct conflict, with equal access and use of informational resources.  However, this conflict is especially apparent in the context of publishing the law.  As illustrated in “Who Owns the Law?” attempts to claim copyright interests in the law itself too common.  While it is understandable that entities such as Lexis and West may want to protect any value they might add to the raw code itself, these entities should not be allowed, through application of copyright law, to become the only or even the primary sources for accessing the law just because they have included annotations.  
In fact, I think we have to be incredibly suspicious of any attempt that would essentially amount to a privatization of the law, or the lawmaking process.  For example, efforts to outsource the codification of laws, as has occurred in states such as Idaho, are a direct assault on the notion of open government.  Especially when these states also claim, despite being at odds with precedent on the subject, copyright interests in the published code.  If the law itself is capable of being commoditized, this leaves little hope for the notion of open government and open government data.  At a minimum, citizens must be able to freely access the laws that govern them.  Therefore, there should be a presumption against protection for copyright claims where government, through the democratic process, has produced any part of the underlying information in question.  Private entities claiming ownership interests in such information should have a heavy burden of proof in establishing a proprietary interest in the any part of the protected information.       
In addition, entities such as Standards Developing Organizations (SDOs), though they may benefit society by efficiently establishing standards that protect people, should not have an absolute interest in the standards they develop just because they are able to produce these standards more quickly than government.  After all, these organizations are essentially self-regulatory bodies that are acting largely to avoid unwanted government oversight.  If these bodies can come up with an acceptable means to regulate the industries they oversee, they can avoid unwanted government intrusion into what are admittedly often complex fields.  Nevertheless, this explains why industries, acting through SDOs, would want governments to adopt their standards as law.  By enacting standards by which the industry will behave, SDOs are essentially filling the shoes of government.  Because of this role, that is, the role of creating standards that will affect broad groups of individuals and entities within a given industry, and ultimately the consumers who purchase or enjoy the services and goods produced by these industries, privately created standards should not be capable of being copyrighted.  The public has a right to know the process by which standards are adopted, as well as an ability to freely access these standards.  I would apply the same level of scrutiny to other private regulatory bodies such as the Motion Picture Association of America, the American Medical Association, and Financial Industry Regulatory Authority.
