I am focusing this week’ entry on Josh Tauberer’s “14 Principles of Open Government Data”, because it provides a necessary foundation for understanding what makes public government data “open”.  Overall, I agree with Tauberer’s perspective on what it takes for open government data to truly become “open” to the public. However, a few of Tauberer’s principles seem to be based on key underlying policies that I am not sure I agree with. Specifically, whom the government should be publishing data for and what the publication of data should entail. 

Tauberer’s first principle to open government data is that information is only meaningfully public if it is available online and for free. I agree that data should be available via the Internet, because it is the best way to ensure individuals do not have to make requests for information in person. Such a process is not only timely, but also inefficient. Although the principle is titled Online and Free, Tauberer accepts the notion that users pay a fee, but only if it is “appropriate”.  It appears that to Tauberer an “appropriate” fee is the marginal costs for the reproduction of the data. However, what does reproduction of the data truly entail? Is it simply the cost of publishing the data online or does it include any value the government adds to the data. The value added may be the way the data is presented, the existence of a user-friendly search engine or even the presence of a guarantee that the data is current (such a guarantee is one of Tauberer’s other principles). Eric Mill’s presentation made it clear that merely producing data online often fails to serve the public if not presented in an effective way. Who should bear the costs of the government doing more then just the minimum of reproduction? Should it be the users or the taxpayers? My instinct is that the users should pay the costs for features such as a user-friendly search engine or an RSS feed.  This question is linked closely with one of the first questions we addressed in class; who benefits from open government data? If the answer to that question is society as a whole, it would follow logically that taxpayers should bear the cost. The point may in fact be moot if such costs are as marginal as Eric Mill suggested during his presentation. 

Tauberer’s second principle to open government data is that the data be primary, which he defines as; “data collected at the source, with the finest possible level of granularity, not in aggregate or modified forms.”  Tauberer goes on to explain that information mediators can achieve more innovative solutions with the rawest form of government data. This principle like the first, traces back to who is digesting and benefiting from open government data. It appears that Tauberer believes that the majority of individuals will not benefit from open government data without the existence of an information mediator. However, what about those individuals who don’t rely on an information mediator, does the government owe them a duty to report data in a particular way? It is unclear what “raw data” truly entails; perhaps Tauberer simply means information published in an unbiased manner. Either way, why should we ask the government to publish raw data and allow the mediators to decide which information to synthesize and publish in a manner that the majority of society derives a benefit from? Ultimately the question is one of trust. Who do you feel more comfortable with shaping open government data-the government or an intermediary?  Tauberer’s answer appears in the discussion of his fifth principle, which is open government data should be analyzable. He explains, “that the most critical value of open government data comes from the public’s ability to carry out its own analyses of raw data, rather then relying on the government’s own analyses. Does the majority of the public truly every carry out its own analysis when an intermediary is disseminating the data? Who’s to say that the intermediary isn’t also a stakeholder in the way the data is interpreted. To me it is the government’s responsibility to publish unbiased data in a manner that the majority of the public can take value from it without the presence of an intermediary. 

Again, I believe Tauberer’s “14 principles of Open Government Data” is an excellent foundation to understanding what “open” data truly entails.  However, I think that several of his principles raise interesting policy questions that are difficult to resolve. 
