The intersection of technology and the law in respect to open data will provide for an interesting power struggle in the legal community between the public and private sectors. While reviewing articles that discuss the efforts to make legal documents public, it has become very clear that private organizations have a strong incentive to keep this information private, with that incentive mainly consisting of the lucrative profits companies such as West and LexisNexis enjoy from their expensive subscription price tags. The arguments offered by legal research firms, such as “legal documents can be misleading” or legal documents are  “meaningless without the context” seem more like a paternalistic effort to maintain a monopoly over the legal information, rather than an expression of legitimate concerns. Whether these legal research firms make persuasive arguments for why much of the law should have limited accessibility is a discussion that will be flushed out as we read and hear more about open data. 

Carl Malamud’s perspective on open data sparks an important theme when figuring out how open government data should be implemented. He asserts that the ability to know and read the law is essential to the functioning of our democracy, which I completely agree with. He takes his argument further, stating “it’s not enough to merely have access to the law.” It is every bit as important to him that people are able to “…utilize legal information in new and innovative ways.”  He is advocating that access to the law is a necessity, and the ability to use the law in the way you want is also a necessity to a democratic society. Carl Malamud’s perspective is a threat to legal research firm’s livelihoods, but he is able to appeal to the core tenants of our society and give an otherwise disinterested public a reason to be interested in what open government data means for the future. While legal research firms express their concerns about the public’s inability to interpret the information, Malamud has been able to provide an argument that aligns itself with our American governmental goals and desire to maintain a democratic society. 

Tauber’s description of the role of open data echoes Carl Malamud’s sentiments about open data being an essential element of a democracy. Tauber says that open government data would contribute to accountability, innovation, participatory policy-making, and access to the law, among other issues. I think discussing the role of open data as an element of democracy will engage a broader audience and the public in what kind of access to open data society feels is necessary to help our country continue progressing as a stable and functioning democracy. The intersection of access to laws and legal information provides an especially interesting theme under the open data umbrella; because of the crucial role law plays in our democracy.

In the discussion for what information should be available freely to the public, I thought a strong argument for using caution when providing open-source data is maintaining credibility, as discussed by Laura Orr, a law librarian. Her point was that while she supports making the law publicly accessible, she also highlights the need for true authentication protocols in order to maintain a level of quality in our legal system that may not be met if we refuse to allow private legal research companies to play a role in providing legal information. Her implication that a combination of both open data sources, as well as private legal research firms, is best for the legal community and essential to maintaining the quality of our interaction with the law is an interesting relationship to think about. I also think that the copyright issues open source data raises will have much broader implications in society on how we use electronics to share information, and that this discussion will affect many more interested groups than has been anticipated.   