Feist establishes that facts without added value cannot support copyright, and that originality is the touchstone of copyright protection. Jacobsen serves to expand our thinking on the value of copyright protection in the modern era of complex and open collaboration. Copyright has to do with giving credit where it's due, as much as making sure that the public knows that it might be paying for something that was created using free piggybacked material. “The conditions set forth in the Artistic License are vital to enable the copyright holder to retain the ability to benefit from the work of downstream users…Copyright licenses are designed to support the right to exclude; money damages alone do not support or enforce that right” seems to encapsulate the thrust of the case, and justify copyright protection in the context of open-source material. The protection that copyright provides is both in support of financial gain, as well as artistic and reputational integrity and control.

Victor Li returns to the PACER/RECAP issue. On the one hand, should the fees on the public provision of documents be paying for the beautification of judicial offices? On the other, in this yet-early era of open government data, it could be argued that government entities should be applauded and even rewarded for innovating of their own initiative. On a related note, it’s crazy to hear that the creation of EDGAR, near and dear to my heart, was both hard-fought and earlier than I'd expected. EDGAR is a classic example of open government done right” real value delivered to the citizens, and a private sector exploitation that yields even more gain to the economy. It sounds like Carl Malamud also paved the way for Lex Machina to build their system for predicting the outcome of IP cases; breaking a monopoly brings both free access to the public and the addition of value and earning of profit by other people.

SDO model rules may or may not really be laws to which everyone is entitled. They look sufficiently-differentiated from the phone book in Feist, for example. On the other hand, annotations made to state law, which are subsequently added to official state law, should maybe be considered donated labor/IP since they're inseparable from the clearly publically-owned code.

Turning to Tauberer, I'm not sure that inert data which is available but not open for analysis is such a problem. The government should be making data open, but as with everything it does must keep an eye on cost. Is scraping and parsing from a PDF really something federal and state agencies need to do for the public, and for private actors with an interest in manipulating the data?

The issue of “information mediators” highlights the problem we've discussed regarding government data being incomprehensible to the layman, and therefore susceptible to mischaracterization by interested parties. However, this model highlights the necessity that journalists and others create metrics based on the data released that citizens can understand.

Cost and effort admittedly seem to be missing from this espousal of principles. For example, the resolution and playback issues sound tone-deaf to cost control. At the same time, having tried to put together complete data sets on specific entities and issues based on just different forms, even within one agency's purview, highlights the importance of the automation and discoverability requirement, and it should get more attention. It is exciting to see the G8 Open Data Charter borrow from this; how would Tauberer rate the EU's result?

"The most critical value of open government data comes from the public’s ability to carry out its own analyses of raw data, rather than relying on a government’s own analysis." This convinced me further of the necessity of data which can be analyzed, rather than simply read. Principle 6 catches government entities reserving discretion to prevent the public from viewing data at their discretion. However, as illustrated by the SAMHSA example, government may need to be able to respond quickly and on a case by case basis in a world where data can be used in increasingly creative and even sinister ways.