As someone who works for a company that was built on the principles of adding value to public data, I believe that publishers have a right to maintain copyright protection over their proprietary information. However, I strongly believe that publishers and government contractors don’t have the right to limit access to government data (provided by the government in its raw form). 

Access to material that has been enriched by a third party must be protected and the intermediary has the right to profit from any enhancements made to the data. If it was not for the profit incentive, there wouldn’t be as many private companies interested in making investments to source through government data and create innovative applications. Towards this, I agree with the view presented by David Robinson et al. in “Government Data and the Invisible Hand,” where the authors argue that the private sector is better equipped to “deliver government information to citizens and can constantly create and reshape the tools individuals use to find and leverage public data.” Private companies spend tremendous amounts of resources to build links between data sets, overlap data with functionality that increases the ease of use for end-users. Third parties also provide a different perspective/interpretation of the data, which can generate more meaningful dialogue between the various stakeholders interested in a particular data set (whatever the nature of the data may be). 

As I read through the material this week, I was somewhat surprised by the fact that articles did not specifically deal with ownership issues related to the data where a contractor is hired by the government to provide insights or add value to the data. Recently, there were several instances reported where the federal government contracted out to a private company and was forced to buy back the data. Specifically, after the government contractor running USASpending.gov and FPDS.gov, both government procurement data portals, the Government Services Administration (GSA) was forced to buy-back its “own spending transparency website.”  According to the procurement documents published on FBO.gov, Government Computer Enterprises (GCE), the prime contractor responsible for both USASpending.gov and FPDS was the “owner of essential data rights” for both systems. GCE did not claim data rights to the raw procurement data. Rather, it argued that once this data was “touched” by applications developed by GCE, value was added, making the data essentially copyrightable. The cost to the taxpayers for the government to buy-back both FPDS and USASpending.gov was $9.5 million. Similarly, the Department of Labor had to pay $23.0 million to GCE to gain ownership of its (the agencies) data for the department’s New Core Financial Management System (NCFMS).
The above two examples highlight the lack of clarity on copyright and licensing issues. Both the data submitted to NCFMS and FPDS/USASpending.gov is public data. The government went into a contractual relationship with the contractors and was forced to buy-back the data and infrastructure that supported the applications, since relegating back to the “raw” data would be costly and burdensome for the agencies and the public users. 

News related to GSA and DOL buying back NCFMS and USASpending.gov/FPDS-NG: 
http://www.federalnewsradio.com/491/3697188/Inside-the-Reporters-Notebook-Labor-GSA-forced-to-buy-systems-from-bankrupt-vendor-dashboard-fever-strikes-DHS
