When reading the Open Government Directive, I was left with a sense of ambiguity as to whether the Directive was a display of government accountability and proactivity regarding open data, or merely political rhetoric to appease the public. Declaring government-wide support of increased transparency, participation, and collaboration is easy, but implementing and enforcing the necessary guidelines to transform aspirations into reality is much more difficult. Publicizing a desire for increased transparency, participation and collaboration does not, in itself, created increased  transparency, participation, and collaboration.

I found that many of the guidlines within the Directive were broad and ambiguous (e.g., "Agencies should publish information online in an open format"). The "should" language, coupled with the lack of explicit requirements, allows agencies to undertake minimal effort to "promote open government data" (and face little to no discipline if they don't), while the Federal Government reaps public accolade for the creation of this policy.

Regarding participation, the Directive states, "To create more informed and effective policies, the Federal Government should promote opportunities for the public to participate throughout the decision-making process. Your agency's Open Government Plan should explain in detail how your agency will improve participation, including steps your agency will take to revise its current practices to increase opportunities for public participation in and feedback on the agency's core mission activities." Absent from the Directive is guidance to achieve this objective; instead, the responsibility of generating civic participation is deferred to the agency. By not stipulating actual requirements, the Open Government Directive does not assume responsibility or accountability for the policies it stipulates. The section on collaboration reads similarly ("Your agency's Open Government Plan should explain in detail how your agency will improve collaboration . . .").

In regards to transparency, the Directive requires that all government agencies create a web portal "to serve as the gateway for agency activities related to the Open Government Directive and [the agency] shall maintain and update that webpage in a timely fashion." It also has a requirement that the portal includes a mechanism for the public to provbide feedback. However, it appears that these requirements are poorly enforced. The Department of Homeland Security's portal was kast updated in January 2013, and it does not include any mechanism for the public to provide feedback.

However, in the Government's defense, participation and collaboration are the responsibility of the public. Federal policies cannot, in themselves, rectify lack of civic engagement. For instance, a 2010 study by the Pew Center revealed that whites are significantly more likely than blacks and latinos to participate online about government issues and policies. The multitudes of factors influencing the level of participation are deeply rooted in history, geographical location and culture; therefore, a singular, policy-based approach will not be an effective remedy. Instead, perhaps a long-term approach, such as striving to increase technological access and literacy in specific areas of the nation, would be a more effective solution. 

I agreed with many of the proposed principles outlines in the Sunlight Foundation's Open Data Guideline, but I felt that some of the proposed principles, such as mandatory code sharing and required documentation of the data creation process, hold the government to an exceedingly high standard that we do not require of private agencies. In light of Feist v. Rural Telephone Co., is seems as if the act of data aggregation and distribution suffers from a free-rider problem. There is a lack of incentive for an organization to dedicate the time, effort, and expenses necessary for data aggregation if numerous users may reap the benefits of the data without contributing any of their own resources. Implementing extraneous requirements would further the disparity in effort expended vs. benefits obtained by the Government, and potentially stagnate the production of new data.

