# Blog Post – Week 5

## “Good Enough is the New Perfect”

If Hollee Schwartz Temple’s book about motherhood, “Good Enough is the New Perfect,” is anything like her article in the ABA Journal on digitization of libraries, then it is a one-sided social critique without much praise for the status quo.  I’d like to co-opt the phrase but with the goal of suggesting a different narrative.  As we see in this week’s readings, we’ve come a far way in our use of technology and data.  Nithya Raman makes that abundantly clear.  In some societies, requesting access to bus routes is “not possible” and government is not responsive.  And when open government laws require access to government records, some countries provide data that is wrong or outdated or even manipulated.  

There’s certainly mismatched incentive structures to blame as pointed out by Michael Froomkin.  From an economic standpoint, businesses have an interest in getting data right and in protecting their data – and intellectual property – from widespread release in order to avoid embarrassment that can be costly.  At the same time, these companies can monetize data in ways that are beneficial.  As a result, they have every reason to build databases and then build a fence around them.  But governments do not share the same incentives.  We learn that in the case of the Indian government, there is no reason for the bureaucrats to collect or release bus route data because doing so would only increase accountability pressures from the public.  And when the bus route changes, they would be (duly) criticized.  

By contrast, in the US, we don’t suffer from the same ailments.  We correct this incentive structure imbalance through regulation of the actions of our government, and we benefit from fully funded mandates with teeth and follow up review.  Public accountability developed through legal, political, and social pressures are such that they exist in a whole different playing field than what occurs in India.  What we see as good enough is pretty much perfect when compared with the rest of the world.

In that context, the fixes that we need are many but they are also minor in comparison to the data driven ecosystem.  Web links that go to nowhere can be fixed through services such as [Perma.cc](https://perma.cc/).  Documents that are released by government can be digitally signed to authenticate them and the UELMA takes a good step in that direction.  Regulatory law can correct imbalances in government and private data security standards through tough enforcement penalties and required data breach disclosures (now a part of the law in [most states](http://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-information-technology/security-breach-notification-laws.aspx)).

So back to libraries.  I agree that libraries are getting smaller in physical size, but I disagree that there is a huge problem taking place.  West and Lexis have opened up legal research in impressive ways.  When I recently conducted a legal history project on an obscure Constitutional Law case from the 1950s, I found that the most painful exercise in legal research was using microfilm, but that hurdle has not changed in years.  Many documents were available on WestLaw, including oral argument transcripts, which I found to be impressive.  One repository of legal papers was only available at the Princeton Library, but that is not a matter of legal research as much as of the proprietary nature of private paper collections.  At the end of the day, my research took me through the papers of Supreme Court justices, of local DC oral arguments and hearings, and of legal history topics connected to this case, and I found that my search was made easier, not harder, through the availability of online research tools.  The notion that libraries are shrinking did not ring true to me as a student here in Washington, DC.

I do think that there are changes that need to be made around the edges.  But I disagree that digitizing everything is a necessary solution.  For as long as archives have been around, knowledge has been dispersed in repositories and not easily found.  The last twenty years have seen amazing progress in putting that data at our fingertips.  This is not a history to be criticized.

## An Exception

Well, there is an exception to that point.  I think the greatest hurdle to centralization of information and access to data is ensuring privacy – and especially ensuring respect for those who want a chance to start over in life. At this point in the history of technology, the limits of the Internet and of our technological capacity have limited the availability of data and resulted in practical obscurity.  When this ends, where will we land?  This is a major topic of the White House’s big data report and one that requires much scrutiny.

An example of this problem is discrimination.  With so much data, it may become easier for businesses or governments to discriminate against individuals based on obscure criteria that may be inaccurate or unfair.  The FTC and the Commerce Department are investigating this issue – and the White House has called for baseline privacy legislation to correct the issue.  The question will be how the resulting limits impact the availability of data.

On the topic of privacy, I do hope that future discussions will not be governed by Temple’s high standards.  We can achieve a workable solution that is not perfect but meets the goals set out by the White House and stakeholders.


